# BioPython  

**Gabriel Ramírez Vilchis**  

## Description  

Repository for BioPython class, belonging to the Undergraduate Program in Genomic Sciences, UNAM.  

## Structure  

├── data     # Data files required as input for some scripts</p>
├── docs     # Notes documents (.txt, .md)</p>
├── results      # Results files generated by the scripts</p>
├── src        # Code scripts</p>
├── README.md        # Repository description file</p>
├── LICENSE.md        # License</p>
└── .gitignore            # Files that should be ignored by Git</p>

## Motivación  

To have a repository with all the projects and scripts generated during the course _BioPython_ from the Undergraduate Program in Genomic Sciences, to control the versions of these codes, and to collaborate with others in software development. 
This repository also looks up to develop tools that facilitate the analysis of great ammounts of data in biologic research.

## System requeriments

To execute the scripts in this repository, you must have the Python interpreter.

## Instalation

All scripts are available in the repository. If there are additional instalation details, those will be described in the script internal documentation.    

## Inicio rápido  

In this repository you will find notes from the course _BioPython_, as well as scripts that automate the analysis of biologic data.  

## License  

MIT License  

Copyright (c) 2022 Gabriel Ramírez Vilchis  

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.  

(Please, read the LICENSE file in the repository).  

## Support information contact  

For comments or suggestions, please send an email to: [gramirez@lcg.unam.mx](mailto:gramirez@lcg.unam.mx).  
