1. J Biomed Semantics. 2019 May 22;10(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s13326-019-0200-x.

Similarity corpus on microbial transcriptional regulation.

Lithgow-Serrano O(1)(2), Gama-Castro S(3), Ishida-Gutiérrez C(3), Mejía-Almonte 
C(3), Tierrafría VH(3), Martínez-Luna S(3), Santos-Zavaleta A(3), 
Velázquez-Ramírez D(3), Collado-Vides J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Computational Genomics, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México (UNAM). A.P., 565-A Cuernavaca, Morelos, 62100, México. 
olithgow@ccg.unam.mx.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones en Matemáticas Aplicadas y en Sistemas (IIMAS), 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico City, México. 
olithgow@ccg.unam.mx.
(3)Computational Genomics, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México (UNAM). A.P., 565-A Cuernavaca, Morelos, 62100, México.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ability to express the same meaning in different ways is a 
well-known property of natural language. This amazing property is the source of 
major difficulties in natural language processing. Given the constant increase 
in published literature, its curation and information extraction would strongly 
benefit from efficient automatic processes, for which corpora of sentences 
evaluated by experts are a valuable resource.
RESULTS: Given our interest in applying such approaches to the benefit of 
curation of the biomedical literature, specifically that about gene regulation 
in microbial organisms, we decided to build a corpus with graded textual 
similarity evaluated by curators and that was designed specifically oriented to 
our purposes. Based on the predefined statistical power of future analyses, we 
defined features of the design, including sampling, selection criteria, balance, 
and size, among others. A non-fully crossed study design was applied. Each pair 
of sentences was evaluated by 3 annotators from a total of 7; the scale used in 
the semantic similarity assessment task within the Semantic Evaluation workshop 
(SEMEVAL) was adapted to our goals in four successive iterative sessions with 
clear improvements in the agreed guidelines and interrater reliability results. 
Alternatives for such a corpus evaluation have been widely discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first similarity corpus-a 
dataset of pairs of sentences for which human experts rate the semantic 
similarity of each pair-in this domain of knowledge. We have initiated its 
incorporation in our research towards high-throughput curation strategies based 
on natural language processing.

DOI: 10.1186/s13326-019-0200-x
PMCID: PMC6532127
PMID: 31118102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
Cites: 10155859, 9678326, 8747118, 8313968, 7990182



1. J Bacteriol. 2009 Jan;191(1):23-31. doi: 10.1128/JB.01017-08. Epub 2008 Oct
31.

Bioinformatics resources for the study of gene regulation in bacteria.

Collado-Vides J(1), Salgado H, Morett E, Gama-Castro S, Jiménez-Jacinto V, 
Martínez-Flores I, Medina-Rivera A, Muñiz-Rascado L, Peralta-Gil M, 
Santos-Zavaleta A.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Genómica Computacional, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, A.P. 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62100, Mexico. 
collado@ccg.unam.mx

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01017-08
PMCID: PMC2612416
PMID: 18978060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 7990032, 7186461, 7120928, 6985748, 6060643, 5002191, 3911252, 3769190, 3531196, 3013702, 2881121, 2612415



1. J Mol Biol. 2005 Nov 18;354(1):184-99. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.09.037. Epub
2005  Oct 4.

Comparative studies of transcriptional regulation mechanisms in a group of eight 
gamma-proteobacterial genomes.

Espinosa V(1), González AD, Vasconcelos AT, Huerta AM, Collado-Vides J.

Author information:
(1)National Bioinformatics Center, Industria y San José, Capitolio Nacional, CP. 
10200, Habana Vieja, Ciudad de la Habana, Cuba.

Experimental data on the Escherichia coli transcriptional regulation has enabled 
the construction of statistical models to predict new regulatory elements within 
its genome. Far less is known about the transcriptional regulatory elements in 
other gamma-proteobacteria with sequenced genomes, so it is of great interest to 
conduct comparative genomic studies oriented to extracting biologically relevant 
information about transcriptional regulation in these less studied organisms 
using the knowledge from E. coli. In this work, we use the information stored in 
the TRACTOR_DB database to conduct a comparative study on the mechanisms of 
transcriptional regulation in eight gamma-proteobacteria and 38 regulons. We 
assess the conservation of transcription factors binding specificity across all 
the eight genomes and show a correlation between the conservation of a 
regulatory site and the structure of the transcription unit it regulates. We 
also find a marked conservation of site-promoter distances across the eight 
organisms and a correspondence of the statistical significance of co-occurrence 
of pairs of transcription factor binding sites in the regulatory regions, which 
is probably related to a conserved architecture of higher-order regulatory 
complexes in the organisms studied. The results obtained in this study using the 
information on transcriptional regulation in E. coli enable us to conclude that 
not only transcription factor-binding sites are conserved across related species 
but also several of the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms previously 
identified in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.09.037
PMID: 16236313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 5696542, 3147536, 3001071, 2761915, 2738135, 2653031, 2643304, 2491489, 2374795, 2329645, 1669740



1. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2005 Jul;72(1 Pt 1):011919. doi: 
10.1103/PhysRevE.72.011919. Epub 2005 Jul 29.

Nonlinear software sensor for monitoring genetic regulation processes with noise 
and modeling errors.

Ibarra-Junquera V(1), Torres LA, Rosu HC, Argüello G, Collado-Vides J.

Author information:
(1)Potosinian Institute of Science and Technology, San Luis Potosí, Mexico. 
vrani@ipicyt.edu.mx

Nonlinear control techniques by means of a software sensor that are commonly 
used in chemical engineering could be also applied to genetic regulation 
processes. We provide here a realistic formulation of this procedure by 
introducing an additive white Gaussian noise, which is usually found in 
experimental data. Besides, we include model errors, meaning that we assume we 
do not know the nonlinear regulation function of the process. In order to 
illustrate this procedure, we employ the Goodwin dynamics of the concentrations 
[B. C. Goodwin, (Academic, New York, 1963)] in the simple form recently applied 
to single gene systems and some operon cases [H. De Jong, J. Comput. Biol. 9, 67 
(2002)], which involves the dynamics of the mRNA, given protein and metabolite 
concentrations. Further, we present results for a three gene case in coregulated 
sets of transcription units as they occur in prokaryotes. However, instead of 
considering their full dynamics, we use only the data of the metabolites and a 
designed software sensor. We also show, more generally, that it is possible to 
rebuild the complete set of nonmeasured concentrations despite the uncertainties 
in the regulation function or, even more, in the case of not knowing the mRNA 
dynamics. In addition, the rebuilding of concentrations is not affected by the 
perturbation due to the additive white Gaussian noise and also we managed to 
filter the noisy output of the biological system.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.72.011919
PMID: 16090013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: This article has not any cites in the available databases.



1. Indian J Exp Biol. 2003 Oct;41(10):1101-13.

Regulation of expression of symbiotic genes in Rhizobium sp. NGR234.

Perret X(1), Kobayashi H, Collado-Vides J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes Supérieures, Université de 
Genève, 1 chemin de l'Impératrice, CH-1292 Chambésy, Genève, Switzerland. 
Xavier.Perret@bioveg.urige.ch

Research in the field of Rhizobium-legume symbiosis faces a new challenge: 
integrate the wealth of information generated by genomic projects. The goal: 
apprehend the complexity of the molecular mechanisms involved in symbiotic 
associations. At the time of writing, the genomes of three micro-symbionts 
(Bradyrhizobium japonicum, Mesorhizobium loti and Sinorhizobium meliloti) have 
been sequenced, and two more (those of Rhizobium leguminosarum and Rhizobium 
etli) will be completed in the near future. Together, completed rhizobial 
genomes represent already 23,393,822 bp of DNA sequence and 21,797 predicted 
open reading frames (ORFs). To identify candidate-symbiotic genes in such a 
broad database, predict their function and dissect the regulatory networks that 
govern their expression are no simple tasks. One way to confront this problem is 
to combine different datasets, in particular genetic and transcriptional maps as 
well as predicted promoters from bioinformatics analyses. Here, we would like to 
illustrate this type of approach with the analysis of the symbiotic plasmid 
(pNGR234a) of the broad host-range Rhizobium sp. NGR234.

PMID: 15242276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 6381291, 3973906, 3585131, 2770584, 438593



1. J Theor Biol. 1989 Feb 22;136(4):403-25. doi: 10.1016/s0022-5193(89)80156-0.

A transformational-grammar approach to the study of the regulation of gene 
expression.

Collado-Vides J(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Neurociencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, 
México D.F.

An important problem in biology is the lack of a set of common principles 
unifying biological knowledge. We propose generative grammar for constructing an 
integrative paradigm for the understanding of genome organization and the 
regulation of gene expression. Linguistic terms in molecular biology are 
defined. A genetic syntactic structure is defined as being equivalent to a 
sentence. The hypotheses for the grammar of genome structure are: (i) the 
"grammaticality" of the linguistic approach studies the "regulability" of genome 
structures; (ii) the "regulability" of genetic structures is independent from 
their specific biochemical meaning and (iii) the dynamics of regulation is 
implicit in the genome structure. A general structure is presented for the 
grammar; the application of phase-structure rules is justified by the existence 
of lexical categories. Transformational rules are utilized to represent loops of 
regulation. Negative inducible, positive repressible, positive inducible and 
negative repressible alternative mechanisms of regulation are represented, by 
four transformational rules, and the application of these rules is established 
by two principles. Finally, this approach is compared to other linguistic 
applications in molecular biology.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-5193(89)80156-0
PMID: 2811400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 3312021, 2821113, 2447320



