1. mBio. 2022 Oct 26;13(5):e0194922. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01949-22. Epub 2022 Sep 8.

RcgA and RcgR, Two Novel Proteins Involved in the Conjugative Transfer of 
Rhizobial Plasmids.

Castellani LG(1), Luchetti A(1), Nilsson JF(1), Pérez-Giménez J(1), Struck B(2), 
Schlüter A(2), Pühler A(2), Niehaus K(2), Romero D(3), Pistorio M(1), Torres 
Tejerizo G(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CCT-La Plata-CONICET, 
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.
(2)Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), Bielefeld Universitygrid.7491.b, Genome 
Research of Industrial Microorganisms, Bielefeld, Germany.
(3)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.

Rhizobia are Gram-negative bacteria that are able to establish a nitrogen-fixing 
symbiotic interaction with leguminous plants. Rhizobia genomes usually harbor 
several plasmids which can be transferred to other organisms by conjugation. Two 
main mechanisms of the regulation of rhizobial plasmid transfer have been 
described: quorum sensing (QS) and the rctA/rctB system. Nevertheless, new genes 
and molecules that modulate conjugative transfer have recently been described, 
demonstrating that new actors can tightly regulate the process. In this work, by 
means of bioinformatics tools and molecular biology approaches, two hypothetical 
genes are identified as playing key roles in conjugative transfer. These genes 
are located between conjugative genes of plasmid pRfaLPU83a from Rhizobium 
favelukesii LPU83, a plasmid that shows a conjugative transfer behavior 
depending on the genomic background. One of the two mentioned genes, rcgA, is 
essential for conjugation, while the other, rcgR, acts as an inhibitor of the 
process. In addition to introducing this new regulatory system, we show evidence 
of the functions of these genes in different genomic backgrounds and confirm 
that homologous proteins from non-closely related organisms have the same 
functions. These findings set up the basis for a new regulatory circuit of the 
conjugative transfer of plasmids. IMPORTANCE Extrachromosomal DNA elements, such 
as plasmids, allow for the adaptation of bacteria to new environments by 
conferring new determinants. Via conjugation, plasmids can be transferred 
between members of the same bacterial species, different species, or even to 
organisms belonging to a different kingdom. Knowledge about the regulatory 
systems of plasmid conjugative transfer is key in understanding the dynamics of 
their dissemination in the environment. As the increasing availability of 
genomes raises the number of predicted proteins with unknown functions, deeper 
experimental procedures help to elucidate the roles of these determinants. In 
this work, two uncharacterized proteins that constitute a new regulatory circuit 
with a key role in the conjugative transfer of rhizobial plasmids were 
discovered.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01949-22
PMCID: PMC9601222
PMID: 36073816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Cites: 10269804



2. Front Microbiol. 2022 Apr 7;13:858440. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.858440. 
eCollection 2022.

RdsA Is a Global Regulator That Controls Cell Shape and Division in Rhizobium 
etli.

Martínez-Absalón S(1), Guadarrama C(1), Dávalos A(1), Romero D(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

Unlike other bacteria, cell growth in rhizobiales is unipolar and asymmetric. 
The regulation of cell division, and its coordination with metabolic processes 
is an active field of research. In Rhizobium etli, gene RHE_PE00024, located in 
a secondary chromosome, is essential for growth. This gene encodes a predicted 
hybrid histidine kinase sensor protein, participating in a, as yet undescribed, 
two-component signaling system. In this work, we show that a conditional 
knockdown mutant (cKD24) in RHE_PE00024 (hereby referred as rdsA, after 
rhizobium division and shape) generates a striking phenotype, where nearly 64% 
of the cells present a round shape, with stochastic and uncoordinated cell 
division. For rod-shaped cells, a large fraction (12 to 29%, depending on their 
origin) present growth from the old pole, a sector that is normally inactive for 
growth in a wild-type cell. A fraction of the cells (1 to 3%) showed also 
multiple ectopic polar growths. Homodimerization of RdsA appears to be required 
for normal function. RNAseq analysis of mutant cKD24 reveals global changes, 
with downregulated genes in at least five biological processes: cell division, 
wall biogenesis, respiration, translation, and motility. These modifications may 
affect proper structuring of the divisome, as well as peptidoglycan synthesis. 
Together, these results indicate that the hybrid histidine kinase RdsA is an 
essential global regulator influencing cell division and cell shape in R. etli.

Copyright © 2022 Martínez-Absalón, Guadarrama, Dávalos and Romero.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.858440
PMCID: PMC9022086
PMID: 35464952

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Cites: There are no cites to this article.



3. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 26;15(8):e0238218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238218. 
eCollection 2020.

Role of plant compounds in the modulation of the conjugative transfer of 
pRet42a.

Bañuelos-Vazquez LA(1), Castellani LG(2), Luchetti A(2), Romero D(1), Torres 
Tejerizo GA(2), Brom S(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Instituto 
de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CCT-La Plata-CONICET, Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

One of the most studied mechanisms involved in bacterial evolution and 
diversification is conjugative transfer (CT) of plasmids. Plasmids able to 
transfer by CT often encode beneficial traits for bacterial survival under 
specific environmental conditions. Rhizobium etli CFN42 is a Gram-negative 
bacterium of agricultural relevance due to its symbiotic association with 
Phaseolus vulgaris through the formation of Nitrogen-fixing nodules. The genome 
of R. etli CFN42 consists of one chromosome and six large plasmids. Among these, 
pRet42a has been identified as a conjugative plasmid. The expression of the 
transfer genes is regulated by a quorum sensing (QS) system that includes a traI 
gene, which encodes an acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) synthase and two 
transcriptional regulators (TraR and CinR). Recently, we have shown that pRet42a 
can perform CT on the root surface and inside nodules. The aim of this work was 
to determine the role of plant-related compounds in the CT of pRet42a. We found 
that bean root exudates or root and nodule extracts induce the CT of pRet42a in 
the plant rhizosphere. One possibility is that these compounds are used as 
nutrients, allowing the bacteria to increase their growth rate and reach the 
population density leading to the activation of the QS system in a shorter time. 
We tested if P. vulgaris compounds could substitute the bacterial AHL 
synthesized by TraI, to activate the conjugation machinery. The results showed 
that the transfer of pRet42a in the presence of the plant is dependent on the 
bacterial QS system, which cannot be substituted by plant compounds. 
Additionally, individual compounds of the plant exudates were evaluated; among 
these, some increased and others decreased the CT. With these results, we 
suggest that the plant could participate at different levels to modulate the CT, 
and that some compounds could be activating genes in the conjugation machinery.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238218
PMCID: PMC7449395
PMID: 32845909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
Cites: 11165908, 9601222, 9513070, 7856919



4. Plasmid. 2019 Nov;106:102443. doi: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2019.102443. Epub 2019
Nov  2.

Plasmid pSfr64a and the symbiotic plasmid pSfr64b of Sinorhizobium fredii GR64 
control each other's conjugative transfer through quorum-sensing elements.

Cervantes L(1), Miranda-Sánchez F(2), Torres Tejerizo G(3), Romero D(1), Brom 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(2)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico; Department of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA.
(3)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico; Instituto de Biotecnología y 
Biología Molecular (IBBM) - CCT-CONICET-La Plata, Departamento de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La 
Plata, Argentina.
(4)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico. Electronic address: 
sbrom@ccg.unam.mx.

Rhizobia are nitrogen-fixing symbionts of plants. Their genomes frequently 
contain large plasmids, some of which are able to perform conjugative transfer. 
Plasmid pSfr64a from Sinorhizobium fredii GR64 is a conjugative plasmid, whose 
transfer is regulated by quorum sensing genes encoded by itself (traR64a, 
traI64a), in the symbiotic plasmid pSfr64b (traR64b, traI64b), and in the 
chromosome (ngrI). Also, transfer of pSfr64b requires quorum sensing elements 
encoded in this plasmid (traR64b, traI64b), in pSfr64a (traR64a), and in the 
chromosome (ngrI). These results demonstrate that pSfr64a and the symbiotic 
plasmid depend on each other for conjugative transfer. Plasmid pSfr64a from S. 
fredii GR64 is unable to transfer from the genomic background of Rhizobium etli 
CFN42. Our results show that the relaxase of pRet42a is able to process the oriT 
of pSfr64a, and viceversa, underlining their functional similarity and 
suggesting that in addition to the external signals, the "cytoplasmic 
environment" may pose a barrier to plasmid dissemination, even if the plasmids 
are functional in other aspects.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2019.102443
PMID: 31689451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 8628070, 7856919



5. Front Microbiol. 2019 Apr 30;10:910. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00910.
eCollection  2019.

Phylogenomic Rhizobium Species Are Structured by a Continuum of Diversity and 
Genomic Clusters.

González V(1), Santamaría RI(1), Bustos P(1), Pérez-Carrascal OM(1), Vinuesa 
P(1), Juárez S(1), Martínez-Flores I(1), Cevallos MÁ(1), Brom S(1), 
Martínez-Romero E(1), Romero D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Cuernavaca, Mexico.

The bacterial genus Rhizobium comprises diverse symbiotic nitrogen-fixing 
species associated with the roots of plants in the Leguminosae family. Multiple 
genomic clusters defined by whole genome comparisons occur within Rhizobium, but 
their equivalence to species is controversial. In this study we investigated 
such genomic clusters to ascertain their significance in a species phylogeny 
context. Phylogenomic inferences based on complete sets of ribosomal proteins 
and stringent core genome markers revealed the main lineages of Rhizobium. The 
clades corresponding to R. etli and R. leguminosarum species show several 
genomic clusters with average genomic nucleotide identities (ANI > 95%), and a 
continuum of divergent strains, respectively. They were found to be inversely 
correlated with the genetic distance estimated from concatenated ribosomal 
proteins. We uncovered evidence of a Rhizobium pangenome that was greatly 
expanded, both in its chromosomes and plasmids. Despite the variability of 
extra-chromosomal elements, our genomic comparisons revealed only a few chromid 
and plasmid families. The presence/absence profile of genes in the complete 
Rhizobium genomes agreed with the phylogenomic pattern of species divergence. 
Symbiotic genes were distributed according to the principal phylogenomic 
Rhizobium clades but did not resolve genome clusters within the clades. We 
distinguished some types of symbiotic plasmids within Rhizobium that displayed 
different rates of synonymous nucleotide substitutions in comparison to 
chromosomal genes. Symbiotic plasmids may have been repeatedly transferred 
horizontally between strains and species, in the process displacing and 
substituting pre-existing symbiotic plasmids. In summary, the results indicate 
that Rhizobium genomic clusters, as defined by whole genomic identities, might 
be part of a continuous process of evolutionary divergence that includes the 
core and the extrachromosomal elements leading to species formation.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00910
PMCID: PMC6503217
PMID: 31114559
Cites: 10943007, 10891626, 10754339, 9100948, 8628074, 8289204, 8060271, 8052667, 7920277, 7687279, 7477031



6. Environ Microbiol. 2019 Sep;21(9):3430-3446. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14645.
Epub  2019 May 20.

Conjugative transfer between Rhizobium etli endosymbionts inside the root 
nodule.

Bañuelos-Vazquez LA(1), Torres Tejerizo G(1), Cervantes-De La Luz L(1), Girard 
L(2), Romero D(1), Brom S(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(2)Programa de Biología de Sistemas y Biología Sintética, Centro de Ciencias 
Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.

Since the discovery that biological nitrogen fixation ensues in nodules 
resulting from the interaction of rhizobia with legumes, nodules were thought to 
be exclusive for hosting nitrogen-fixing and plant growth promoting bacteria. In 
this work, we uncover a novel function of nodules, as a niche permissive to 
acquisition of plasmids via conjugative transfer. We used Rhizobium etli CFN42, 
which nodulates Phaseolus vulgaris. The genome of R. etli CFN42 contains a 
chromosome and six plasmids. pRet42a is a conjugative plasmid regulated by 
Quorum-Sensing (QS), and pRet42d is the symbiotic plasmid. Here, using confocal 
microscopy and flow cytometry, we show that pRet42a transfers on the root's 
surface, and unexpectedly, inside the nodules. Conjugation still took place 
inside nodules, even when it was restricted on the plant surface by placing the 
QS traI regulator under the promoter of the nitrogenase gene, which is only 
expressed inside the nodules, or by inhibiting the QS transcriptional induction 
of transfer genes with a traM antiactivator on an unstable vector maintained on 
the plant surface and lost inside the nodules. These results conclusively 
confirm the occurrence of conjugation in these structures, defining them as a 
protected environment for bacterial diversification.

© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14645
PMID: 31037804
Cites: 10591227, 10272884, 9601964, 7449395, 7403402, 7141107, 6895182



7. BMC Microbiol. 2016 Jun 29;16(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s12866-016-0755-y.

Site-specific bacterial chromosome engineering mediated by IntA integrase from 
Rhizobium etli.

Hernández-Tamayo R(1), Torres-Tejerizo G(1)(2), Brom S(1), Romero D(3).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 565-A, 62210, Cuernavaca, Morelos, 
Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología 
Molecular, UNLP, CCT-La Plata-CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.
(3)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 565-A, 62210, Cuernavaca, Morelos, 
Mexico. dromero@ccg.unam.mx.

BACKGROUND: The bacterial chromosome may be used to stably maintain foreign DNA 
in the mega-base range. Integration into the chromosome circumvents issues such 
as plasmid replication, stability, incompatibility, and copy number variance. 
The site-specific integrase IntA from Rhizobium etli CFN42 catalyzes a direct 
recombination between two specific DNA sites: attA and attD (23 bp). This 
recombination is stable. The aim of this work was to develop a R. etli 
derivative that may be used as recipient for the integration of foreign DNA in 
the chromosome, adapting the IntA catalyzed site-specific recombination system.
RESULTS: To fulfill our aim, we designed a Rhizobium etli CFN42 derivative, 
containing a "landing pad" (LP) integrated into the chromosome. The LP sector 
consists of a green fluorescent protein gene under the control of the lacZ 
promoter and a spectinomycin resistance gene. Between the lacZ promoter and the 
GFP gene we inserted an IntA attachment site, which does not affect 
transcription from the lac promoter. Also, a mobilizable donor vector was 
generated, containing an attA site and a kanamycin resistance gene; to 
facilitate insertion of foreign DNA, this vector also contains a multicloning 
site. There are no promoters flanking the multicloning site. A biparental mating 
protocol was used to transfer the donor vector into the landing pad strain; 
insertion of the donor vector into the landing pad sector via IntA-mediated attA 
X attA recombination thereby interrupted the expression of the green fluorescent 
protein, generating site-specific cointegrants. Cointegrants were easily 
recognized by screening for antibiotic sensitivity and lack of GFP expression, 
and were obtained with an efficiency of 6.18 %.
CONCLUSIONS: Integration of foreign DNA in Rhizobium, lacking any similarity 
with the genome, can be easily achieved by IntA-mediated recombination. This 
protocol contains the mating and selection procedures for creating and isolating 
integrants.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-016-0755-y
PMCID: PMC4928290
PMID: 27357704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: There are no cites to this article.



8. J Bacteriol. 2015 Nov 23;198(3):591-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.00768-15. Print 2016
Feb  1.

Biased Gene Conversion in Rhizobium etli Is Caused by Preferential Double-Strand 
Breaks on One of the Recombining Homologs.

Yáñez-Cuna FO(1), Castellanos M(1), Romero D(2).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(2)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México dromero@ccg.unam.mx.

Gene conversion, the nonreciprocal transfer of information during homologous 
recombination, is the main process that maintains identity between members of 
multigene families. Gene conversion in the nitrogenase (nifH) multigene family 
of Rhizobium etli was analyzed by using a two-plasmid system, where each plasmid 
carried a copy of nifH. One of the nifH copies was modified, creating 
restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) spaced along the gene. Once 
the modified plasmid was introduced into R. etli, selection was done for 
cointegration with a resident plasmid lacking the RFLPs. Most of the cointegrate 
molecules harbor gene conversion events, biased toward a gain of RFLPs. This 
bias may be explained under the double-strand break repair model by proposing 
that the nifH gene lacking the RFLPs suffers a DNA double-strand break, so the 
incoming plasmid functions as a template for repairing the homolog on the 
resident plasmid. To support this proposal, we cloned an SceI site into the nifH 
homolog that had the RFLPs used for scoring gene conversion. In vivo expression 
of the meganuclease I-SceI allowed the generation of a double-strand break on 
this homolog. Upon introduction of this modified plasmid into an R. etli strain 
lacking I-SceI, biased gene conversion still favored the retention of markers on 
the incoming plasmid. In contrast, when the recipient strain ectopically 
expressed I-SceI, a dramatic reversal in gene conversion bias was seen, favoring 
the preservation of resident sequences. These results show that biased gene 
conversion is caused by preferential double-strand breaks on one of the 
recombining homologs.
IMPORTANCE: In this work, we analyzed gene conversion by using a system that 
entails horizontal gene transfer followed by homologous recombination in the 
recipient cell. Most gene conversion events are biased toward the acquisition of 
the incoming sequences, ranging in size from 120 bp to 800 bp. This bias is due 
to preferential cutting of resident DNA and can be reversed upon introduction of 
a double-strand break on the incoming sequence. Since conditions used in this 
work are similar to those in horizontal gene transfer, it provides evidence 
that, upon transfer, the resident DNA preferentially acquires gene variants.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00768-15
PMCID: PMC4719440
PMID: 26598365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 11276520, 10932983, 8223754, 6776008



9. J Microbiol Methods. 2015 Oct;117:155-63. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.08.005.
Epub  2015 Aug 10.

Development of molecular tools to monitor conjugative transfer in rhizobia.

Tejerizo GT(1), Bañuelos LA(2), Cervantes L(2), Gaytán P(3), Pistorio M(4), 
Romero D(2), Brom S(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CCT-La Plata-CONICET, 
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina. Electronic address: 
gatt@biol.unlp.edu.ar.
(2)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Av. Universidad 1001, Col. Chamilpa, 62210 
Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(3)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Av. 
Universidad 1001, Col. Chamilpa, 62210 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(4)Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CCT-La Plata-CONICET, 
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

Evolution of bacterial populations has been extensively driven by horizontal 
transfer events. Conjugative plasmid transfer is considered the principal 
contributor to gene exchange among bacteria. Several conjugative and mobilizable 
plasmids have been identified in rhizobia, and two major molecular mechanisms 
that regulate their transfer have been described, under laboratory conditions. 
The knowledge of rhizobial plasmid transfer regulation in natural environments 
is very poor. In this work we developed molecular tools to easily monitor the 
conjugative plasmid transfer in rhizobia by flow cytometry (FC) or microscopy. 
24 cassettes were constructed by combining a variety of promotors, fluorescent 
proteins and antibiotic resistance genes, and used to tag plasmids and 
chromosome of donor strains. We were able to detect plasmid transfer after 
conversion of non-fluorescent recipients into fluorescent transconjugants. Flow 
cytometry (FC) was optimized to count donor, recipient and transconjugant 
strains to determine conjugative transfer frequencies. Results were similar, 
when determined either by FC or by viable counts. Our constructions also allowed 
the visualization of transconjugants in crosses performed on bean roots. The 
tools presented here may also be used for other purposes, such as analysis of 
transcriptional fusions or single-cell tagging. Application of the system will 
allow the survey of how different environmental conditions or other regulators 
modulate plasmid transfer in rhizobia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.08.005
PMID: 26272377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 8862416, 7449395, 7403402, 6617588, 4928290



10. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Sep 30;94(5):963-87. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12810. Online ahead
of  print.

A comparison of key aspects of gene regulation in Streptomyces coelicolor and 
Escherichia coli using nucleotide-resolution transcription maps produced in 
parallel by global and differential RNA sequencing.

Romero DA(1), Hasan AH, Lin YF, Kime L, Ruiz-Larrabeiti O, Urem M, Bucca G, 
Mamanova L, Laing EE, van Wezel GP, Smith CP, Kaberdin VR, McDowall KJ.

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
LS2 9JT, UK.

Streptomyces coelicolor is a model for studying bacteria renowned as the 
foremost source of natural products used clinically. Post-genomic studies have 
revealed complex patterns of gene expression and links to growth, morphological 
development and individual genes. However, the underlying regulation remains 
largely obscure, but undoubtedly involves steps after transcription initiation. 
Here we identify sites involved in RNA processing and degradation as well as 
transcription within a nucleotide-resolution map of the transcriptional 
landscape. This was achieved by combining RNA-sequencing approaches suited to 
the analysis of GC-rich organisms. Escherichia coli was analysed in parallel to 
validate the methodology and allow comparison. Previously, sites of RNA 
processing and degradation had not been mapped on a transcriptome-wide scale for 
E. coli. Through examples, we show the value of our approach and data sets. This 
includes the identification of new layers of transcriptional complexity 
associated with several key regulators of secondary metabolism and morphological 
development in S. coelicolor and the identification of host-encoded leaderless 
mRNA and rRNA processing associated with the generation of specialized ribosomes 
in E. coli. New regulatory small RNAs were identified for both organisms. 
Overall the results illustrate the diversity in mechanisms used by different 
bacterial groups to facilitate and regulate gene expression.

© 2014 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12810
PMCID: PMC4681348
PMID: 25266672
Cites: 9410914, 9130861, 9094748, 8794815, 8780764, 8779481, 8594442, 8459731, 8120823, 7566282, 6667686, 6614810, 6047131, 6028130, 5943314, 5785230, 5499594, 5389530, 5270532, 5230787, 5145812, 5055605, 4941574, 4929434, 4895711, 4782308, 4603805, 4495205, 4457907, 4421045



11. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 8;15(1):575. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-575.

Genomic basis of symbiovar mimosae in Rhizobium etli.

Rogel MA, Bustos P, Santamaría RI, González V, Romero D, Cevallos MÁ, Lozano L, 
Castro-Mondragón J, Martínez-Romero J, Ormeño-Orrillo E, Martínez-Romero E(1).

Author information:
(1)Ecological Genomics programs, Genomics Science Center, CCG, Cuernavaca, 
Morelos, Mexico. esperanzaeriksson@yahoo.com.mx.

BACKGROUND: Symbiosis genes (nod and nif) involved in nodulation and nitrogen 
fixation in legumes are plasmid-borne in Rhizobium. Rhizobial symbiotic variants 
(symbiovars) with distinct host specificity would depend on the type of 
symbiosis plasmid. In Rhizobium etli or in Rhizobium phaseoli, symbiovar 
phaseoli strains have the capacity to form nodules in Phaseolus vulgaris while 
symbiovar mimosae confers a broad host range including different mimosa trees.
RESULTS: We report on the genome of R. etli symbiovar mimosae strain Mim1 and 
its comparison to that from R. etli symbiovar phaseoli strain CFN42. Differences 
were found in plasmids especially in the symbiosis plasmid, not only in nod gene 
sequences but in nod gene content. Differences in Nod factors deduced from the 
presence of nod genes, in secretion systems or ACC-deaminase could help explain 
the distinct host specificity. Genes involved in P. vulgaris exudate uptake were 
not found in symbiovar mimosae but hup genes (involved in hydrogen uptake) were 
found. Plasmid pRetCFN42a was partially contained in Mim1 and a plasmid 
(pRetMim1c) was found only in Mim11. Chromids were well conserved.
CONCLUSIONS: The genomic differences between the two symbiovars, mimosae and 
phaseoli may explain different host specificity. With the genomic analysis 
presented, the term symbiovar is validated. Furthermore, our data support that 
the generalist symbiovar mimosae may be older than the specialist symbiovar 
phaseoli.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-575
PMCID: PMC4125696
PMID: 25005495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 11165908, 8104056, 7318466, 6927923, 6503217, 5968381, 5690337, 4959248



12. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2014 Jun;88(3):565-78. doi: 10.1111/1574-6941.12325. Epub
 2014 Apr 7.

Rhizobial plasmid pLPU83a is able to switch between different transfer 
machineries depending on its genomic background.

Torres Tejerizo G(1), Pistorio M, Althabegoiti MJ, Cervantes L, Wibberg D, 
Schlüter A, Pühler A, Lagares A, Romero D, Brom S.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México; Instituto de 
Biotecnología y Biología Molecular, CCT-La Plata-CONICET, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La 
Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

Plasmids have played a major role in bacterial evolution, mainly by their 
capacity to perform horizontal gene transfer (HGT). Their conjugative transfer 
(CT) properties are usually described in terms of the plasmid itself. In this 
work, we analyzed structural and functional aspects of the CT of pLPU83a, an 
accessory replicon from Rhizobium sp. LPU83, able to transfer from its parental 
strain, from Ensifer meliloti, or from Rhizobium etli. pLPU83a contains a 
complete set of transfer genes, featuring a particular organization, shared with 
only two other rhizobial plasmids. These plasmids contain a TraR quorum-sensing 
(QS) transcriptional regulator, but lack an acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) 
synthase gene. We also determined that the ability of pLPU83a to transfer from 
R. etli CFN42 genomic background was mainly achieved through mobilization, 
employing the machinery of the endogenous plasmid pRetCFN42a, falling under 
control of the QS regulators from pRetCFN42a. In contrast, from its native or 
from the E. meliloti background, pLPU83a utilized its own machinery for 
conjugation, requiring the plasmid-encoded traR. Activation of TraR seemed to be 
AHL independent. The results obtained indicate that the CT phenotype of a 
plasmid is dictated not only by the genes it carries, but by their interaction 
with its genomic context.

© 2014 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6941.12325
PMID: 24646299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 10194956, 9601222, 9048898, 7902896, 7449395, 7403402, 5958079, 4750851, 4700958, 4294206, 4224046



13. J Bacteriol. 2013 Oct;195(20):4668-77. doi: 10.1128/JB.00714-13. Epub 2013 Aug
 9.

Characterization of IntA, a bidirectional site-specific recombinase required for 
conjugative transfer of the symbiotic plasmid of Rhizobium etli CFN42.

Hernández-Tamayo R(1), Sohlenkamp C, Puente JL, Brom S, Romero D.

Author information:
(1)Programas de Ingenería Genómica.

Site-specific recombination occurs at short specific sequences, mediated by the 
cognate recombinases. IntA is a recombinase from Rhizobium etli CFN42 and 
belongs to the tyrosine recombinase family. It allows cointegration of plasmid 
p42a and the symbiotic plasmid via site-specific recombination between 
attachment regions (attA and attD) located in each replicon. Cointegration is 
needed for conjugative transfer of the symbiotic plasmid. To characterize this 
system, two plasmids harboring the corresponding attachment sites and intA were 
constructed. Introduction of these plasmids into R. etli revealed IntA-dependent 
recombination events occurring at high frequency. Interestingly, IntA promotes 
not only integration, but also excision events, albeit at a lower frequency. 
Thus, R. etli IntA appears to be a bidirectional recombinase. IntA was purified 
and used to set up electrophoretic mobility shift assays with linear fragments 
containing attA and attD. IntA-dependent retarded complexes were observed only 
with fragments containing either attA or attD. Specific retarded complexes, as 
well as normal in vivo recombination abilities, were seen even in derivatives 
harboring only a minimal attachment region (comprising the 5-bp central region 
flanked by 9- to 11-bp inverted repeats). DNase I-footprinting assays with IntA 
revealed specific protection of these zones. Mutations that disrupt the 
integrity of the 9- to 11-bp inverted repeats abolish both specific binding and 
recombination ability, while mutations in the 5-bp central region severely 
reduce both binding and recombination. These results show that IntA is a 
bidirectional recombinase that binds to att regions without requiring 
neighboring sequences as enhancers of recombination.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00714-13
PMCID: PMC3807439
PMID: 23935046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 4928290



14. J Bacteriol. 2012 Dec;194(24):6978. doi: 10.1128/JB.01882-12.

Draft genome sequence of the bean-nodulating Sinorhizobium fredii strain GR64.

Torres Tejerizo G(1), Lozano L, González V, Bustos P, Romero D, Brom S.

Author information:
(1)Programas de Ingeniería Genómica, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Cuernavaca, Morelos, México. gatt@ccg.unam.mx

Sinorhizobium fredii GR64 is a peculiar strain that is able to effectively 
nodulate bean but not soybean, the common host of S. fredii. Here we present the 
draft genome of S. fredii GR64. This information will contribute to a better 
understanding of the symbiotic rhizobium-plant interaction and of rhizobial 
evolution.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01882-12
PMCID: PMC3510590
PMID: 23209231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 4571125



15. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2012 Oct;82(1):37-49. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2012.01405.x. Epub 2012 May 25.

Understanding microbial community diversity metrics derived from metagenomes: 
performance evaluation using simulated data sets.

Bonilla-Rosso G(1), Eguiarte LE, Romero D, Travisano M, Souza V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecología Evolutiva, Instituto de Ecología, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, México D.F, México.

Metagenomics holds the promise of greatly advancing the study of diversity in 
natural communities, but novel theoretical and methodological approaches must 
first be developed and adjusted for these data sets. We evaluated widely used 
macroecological metrics of taxonomic diversity on a simulated set of metagenomic 
samples, using phylogenetically meaningful protein-coding genes as ecological 
proxies. To our knowledge, this is the first approach of this kind to evaluate 
taxonomic diversity metrics derived from metagenomic data sets. We demonstrate 
that abundance matrices derived from protein-coding marker genes reproduce more 
faithfully the structure of the original community than those derived from 
SSU-rRNA gene. We also found that the most commonly used diversity metrics are 
biased estimators of community structure and differ significantly from their 
corresponding real parameters and that these biases are most likely caused by 
insufficient sampling and differences in community phylogenetic composition. Our 
results suggest that the ranking of samples using multidimensional metrics makes 
a good qualitative alternative for contrasting community structure and that 
these comparisons can be greatly improved with the incorporation of metrics for 
both community structure and phylogenetic diversity. These findings will help to 
achieve a standardized framework for community diversity comparisons derived 
from metagenomic data sets.

© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2012.01405.x
PMID: 22554028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 4681832



16. BMC Microbiol. 2011 Jun 25;11:149. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-149.

The conjugative plasmid of a bean-nodulating Sinorhizobium fredii strain is 
assembled from sequences of two Rhizobium plasmids and the chromosome of a 
Sinorhizobium strain.

Cervantes L(1), Bustos P, Girard L, Santamaría RI, Dávila G, Vinuesa P, Romero 
D, Brom S.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Av, Universidad 1001, Cuernavaca, Morelos, CP 
62240, México.

BACKGROUND: Bean-nodulating Rhizobium etli originated in Mesoamerica, while 
soybean-nodulating Sinorhizobium fredii evolved in East Asia. S. fredii strains, 
such as GR64, have been isolated from bean nodules in Spain, suggesting the 
occurrence of conjugative transfer events between introduced and native strains. 
In R. etli CFN42, transfer of the symbiotic plasmid (pRet42d) requires 
cointegration with the endogenous self-transmissible plasmid pRet42a. Aiming at 
further understanding the generation of diversity among bean nodulating strains, 
we analyzed the plasmids of S. fredii GR64: pSfr64a and pSfr64b (symbiotic 
plasmid).
RESULTS: The conjugative transfer of the plasmids of strain GR64 was analyzed. 
Plasmid pSfr64a was self-transmissible, and required for transfer of the 
symbiotic plasmid. We sequenced pSfr64a, finding 166 ORFs. pSfr64a showed three 
large segments of different evolutionary origins; the first one presented 38 
ORFs that were highly similar to genes located on the chromosome of 
Sinorhizobium strain NGR234; the second one harbored 51 ORFs with highest 
similarity to genes from pRet42d, including the replication, but not the 
symbiosis genes. Accordingly, pSfr64a was incompatible with the R. etli CFN42 
symbiotic plasmid, but did not contribute to symbiosis. The third segment 
contained 36 ORFs with highest similarity to genes localized on pRet42a, 20 of 
them involved in conjugative transfer. Plasmid pRet42a was unable to substitute 
pSfr64a for induction of pSym transfer, and its own transfer was significantly 
diminished in GR64 background. The symbiotic plasmid pSfr64b was found to differ 
from typical R. etli symbiotic plasmids.
CONCLUSIONS: S. fredii GR64 contains a chimeric transmissible plasmid, with 
segments from two R. etli plasmids and a S. fredii chromosome, and a symbiotic 
plasmid different from the one usually found in R. etli bv phaseoli. We infer 
that these plasmids originated through the transfer of a 
symbiotic-conjugative-plasmid cointegrate from R. etli to a S. fredii strain, 
and at least two recombination events among the R. etli plasmids and the S. 
fredii genome. As in R. etli CFN42, the S. fredii GR64 transmissible plasmid is 
required for the conjugative transfer of the symbiotic plasmid. In spite of the 
similarity in the conjugation related genes, the transfer process of these 
plasmids shows a host-specific behaviour.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-149
PMCID: PMC3224233
PMID: 21702991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 7449395, 7403402, 7276703, 6604995, 4294206, 3957693, 3898782, 3730347, 3553834, 3525954, 3510590



17. J Bacteriol. 2011 Mar;193(6):1317-26. doi: 10.1128/JB.01184-10. Epub 2011 Jan
7.

Plasmids with a chromosome-like role in rhizobia.

Landeta C(1), Dávalos A, Cevallos MÁ, Geiger O, Brom S, Romero D.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Ingeniería Genómica, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas-Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 565-A, 62210 Cuernavaca, Mor., 
México.

Replicon architecture in bacteria is commonly comprised of one indispensable 
chromosome and several dispensable plasmids. This view has been enriched by the 
discovery of additional chromosomes, identified mainly by localization of rRNA 
and/or tRNA genes, and also by experimental demonstration of their requirement 
for cell growth. The genome of Rhizobium etli CFN42 is constituted by one 
chromosome and six large plasmids, ranging in size from 184 to 642 kb. Five of 
the six plasmids are dispensable for cell viability, but plasmid p42e is 
unusually stable. One possibility to explain this stability would be that genes 
on p42e carry out essential functions, thus making it a candidate for a 
secondary chromosome. To ascertain this, we made an in-depth functional analysis 
of p42e, employing bioinformatic tools, insertional mutagenesis, and programmed 
deletions. Nearly 11% of the genes in p42e participate in primary metabolism, 
involving biosynthetic functions (cobalamin, cardiolipin, cytochrome o, NAD, and 
thiamine), degradation (asparagine and melibiose), and septum formation 
(minCDE). Synteny analysis and incompatibility studies revealed highly stable 
replicons equivalent to p42e in content and gene order in other Rhizobium 
species. A systematic deletion analysis of p42e allowed the identification of 
two genes (RHE_PE00001 and RHE_PE00024), encoding, respectively, a hypothetical 
protein with a probable winged helix-turn-helix motif and a probable 
two-component sensor histidine kinase/response regulator hybrid protein, which 
are essential for growth in rich medium. These data support the proposal that 
p42e and its homologous replicons (pA, pRL11, pRLG202, and pR132502) merit the 
status of secondary chromosomes.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01184-10
PMCID: PMC3067620
PMID: 21217003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cites: 9611204, 9138774, 9022086, 8602277, 8443676, 7610768, 6266702, 6117902, 6090056, 6011978, 5852556, 5584315, 5552934, 5118466, 4961836, 4700958, 4326196, 4294206, 4274787, 4231840, 4207669, 4185100, 3925955, 3899959, 3898782, 3597991, 3553834, 3245006, 3224233, 3123555



